The Nile River flows from south to north through
eastern Africa. It begins in the rivers that flow into
Lake Victoria (located in modern-day Uganda,
Tanzania, and Kenya), and empties into the
Mediterranean Sea more than 6,600 kilometers
(4,100 miles) to the north, making it one of the
longest river in the world. The Nile River was
critical to the development of ancient Egypt. In
addition to Egypt, the Nile runs through or along
the border of 10 other African countries, namely,
Burundi, Tanzania, Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Uganda, Sudan,
Ethiopia, and South Sudan. Its three main
tributaries are the White Nile, the Blue Nile, and
the Atbara.

The soil of the Nile River delta between El Qâhira
(Cairo) and the Mediterranean Sea is rich in
nutrients, due to the large silt deposits the Nile
leaves behind as it flows into the sea. The banks
of the Nile all along its vast length contain rich soil
as well, thanks to annual flooding that deposits silt.
From space, the contrast between the Nile's lush
green river banks and the barren desert through
which it flows is obvious.

For millennia, much of Egypt's food has been
cultivated in the Nile delta region. Ancient
Egyptians developed irrigation methods to
increase the amount of land they could use for
crops and support a thriving population. Beans,
cotton, wheat, and flax were important and
abundant crops that could be easily stored and
traded.

The Nile River delta was also an ideal growing
location for the papyrus plant. Ancient Egyptians
used the papyrus plant in many ways, such as
making cloth, boxes, and rope, but by far its most
important use was in making paper. Besides using
the river's natural resources for themselves and
trading them with others, early Egyptians also
used the river for bathing, drinking, recreation, and
transportation.

Today, 95 percent of Egyptians live within a few
kilometers of the Nile. Canals bring water from the
Nile to irrigate farms and support cities. The Nile
supports agriculture and fishing. The Nile also has
served as an important transportation route for
thousands of years. Today, some residents of El
Qâhira (Cairo) have begun using private speed
boats, water taxis, or ferries to avoid crowded
streets. Dams, such as the Aswân High Dam in
Egypt, have been built to help to tame the river
and provide a source of hydroelectric power.

However, the silt and sediment that used to flow
north, enriching the soil and building the delta, is
now building up behind the dam instead. Instead
of growing in size through the soil deposits, the
delta is now shrinking due to erosion along the
Mediterranean Sea. In addition, routine annual
flooding no longer occurs along parts of the Nile.
These floods were necessary to flush and clean
the water of human and agricultural waste. As a
result, the water is becoming more polluted.

The Nile River also continues to be an important
trade route, connecting Africa with markets in
Europe and beyond.
